# AMIA2025

## Title 
**Ontology-based Semantic Similarity Measures for Clustering Medical Concepts in Drug Safety**

## Authors  
Jeffery L Painter, François Haguinet, Greg Powell and Andrew Bate

## Abstract

Semantic similarity measures (SSMs) are widely used in biomedical research but remain underutilized in pharmacovigilance. This study evaluates six ontologybased SSMs for clustering MedDRA Preferred Terms (PTs) in drug safety data.  Using the Unified Medical Language System (UMLS), we assess each method's ability to group PTs around medically meaningful centroids. A high-throughput framework was developed with a Java API and Python/R interfaces support large-scale similarity computations. Results show that while path-based methods perform moderately with F1 scores of 0.36 for WUPALMER and 0.28 for LCH, intrinsic information content (IC)-based measures, especially INTRINSIC LIN and SOKAL, consistently yield better clustering accuracy (F1 Score of 0.403).  Validated against expert review and standard MedDRA queries (SMQs), our findings highlight the promise of IC-based SSMs in enhancing pharmacovigilance workflows by improving early signal detection and reducing manual review.


## Preprint Link

https://arxiv.org/pdf/2503.20737

---

This repository contains the original source data used to analyze and create all figures in the manuscript.

# 📁 Directory Structure

- SSM_Analysis.ipynb - Python notebook contains all code to regenerate figures 3-5 found in the manuscript.

Contains the R script 'data_analysis.R' that can be run to recreate all statistics reported in the manuscript. It creates additional figures that were not included in the final paper due to space limitations.

## Data

- smq_definition.csv: CSV containing the SMQs that were evaluated, along with the PT codes that are included in the SMQ definition.
- **adjudicated_results/**: Contains a single CSV file for each of the fully adjudicated inclusion/exclusion results from the SSM evaluation performed by our expert reviewers. 

## Figures

The figures generated by the Python notebook are found in this directory.

